# Pandemic dynamics determinants in multi-layered urban transportation networks
### Work in progress
In an event of a pandemic, a policy regulator may take several actions, that we further call policy designs, in order to minimize and to control the number of people being affected.  The development of the epidemic depends on various factors, including the intensity and frequency of social contacts, contagiousness of a particular virus strain, and the level of protection applied during those contacts. In particular, one area where individuals can transmit the disease is the urban space of a large city. In such environment, people meet at various points of interest (POIs) or on their way of getting there, including sidewalks and in public transportation. We consider two dimensions of complexity: a multilayered network (where layers represent different types of commute: footwalk, individual cars, busses and metro) combined with the existence of virus strains characterized by different contagiousness levels. In the project funded by NSERC Alliance grant, we have developed a multi-agent simulation framework in which we model a two-variant virus spread in a complex multilayered network including a real-world urban public transportation system with participants heterogeneous in terms of, e.g., locations, routes, and expectations regarding public transport arrivals. The results show that decisions, and hence the epidemic's scale, are heavily impacted by the network itself due to the graph routing process and infection schemes differing within it. The network's layering allows for capturing the fact that the pedestrian layer's infection schemes are significantly different from the patterns according to which the agents can infect each other in a crowded urban transportation system. The project aims to analyze the connection between the properties of such a network combined with actions of the urban transportation network operator and the virus spread. The results show that the local sub-graph characteristics including topology, structure, or statistics such as its degree distribution and density, affect the viruses' transmission rates. The research also assesses the effect of modifying public transport running frequency on the spread of two different virus strains (that is with different levels on contagiousness). In particular, lowering the running frequency can discourage agents from taking public transportation too often, especially for shorter travels. On the other hand, the low frequency contribute to more crowded streetcars or subway cars if the policy is not designed correctly, which is why such an analysis may prove valuable in finding the "sweet spots" that optimize the system. The proposed approach and simulation model has been illustrated on real world data. We are modelling actual urban transportation network in downtown Toronto along with commuters choosing between cars, footwalk, metro and street carts. The simulation results show that there is a an optimal point of operational frequency for a transportation system. 

We have developed the agent-based simulation model using the Julia programming language, and in particular, using the OpenStreetMapX.jl Julia library. The spatial data comes from the OpenStreetMap project along with "TTC Routes and Schedules" dataset from the Toronto Open Data portal.
